### Setting the working directory

```
setwd(path) 
```

*```setwd(path)``` : function is used to set the current working directory to the specified path. The working directory is the default location where R will look for files and where it will save files if no specific directory is provided. By changing the working directory, you can conveniently access and save files in the desired location.

### reading the csv file

```
strain1 <- read.csv("strain1_COG.csv")
```

* ```strain1``` : This is the name of the variable where the data from the CSV file will be stored. It is created and assigned the data read from the file.

* ```<-``` : This is the assignment operator in R. It assigns the data read from the CSV file to the variable strain1.

* ```read.csv("strain1_COG.csv")``` : This is the function call to read.csv(), which reads the data from the file "strain1_COG.csv" and returns it as a data frame. The file is assumed to be located in the current working directory unless a full path is provided.

The ```read.csv()``` function in R reads the data from the CSV file, automatically infers column names from the header row (first row) of the file, and creates a data frame with the read data. The resulting data frame strain1 will have rows and columns corresponding to the data from the CSV file.

### To count the frequency of the individual items present inside the data frame

```
strain1 <- table(strain1$strain1_COG)
```

* ```strain1``` : This is the name of the variable where the frequency table will be stored. It is created and assigned the frequency table generated by the table() function.

* ```<-``` : This is the assignment operator in R. It assigns the frequency table to the variable strain1.

* ```table(strain1$strain1_COG)``` : This is the function call to table(), which generates a frequency table for the column named "strain1_COG" in the strain1 data frame.

The expression ```strain1$strain1_COG``` is used to access the column ``` "strain1_COG" ``` from the data frame strain1. This column is assumed to contain categorical data, such as different categories or factors representing observations.

The ```table()``` function then counts the occurrences of each unique value in the specified column and creates a table that shows the frequency of each category or factor. The resulting frequency table will have rows corresponding to the unique values in the ``` "strain1_COG" ``` column and a corresponding count of how many times each value appears in the data.

### To view the particular table

```
View(strain1)
```

* ```View()``` : This is the function that opens the data viewer. It takes one or more objects (data frames) as arguments and opens a viewer window to display the data in a tabular format.

* ```strain1``` : This is the object (data frame) that you want to view. In the context of your code, it is the variable that contains your data in tabular form.

When you execute View(strain1), R will open a new viewer window, which will display the data in strain1 as a spreadsheet-like table. This viewer window allows you to interactively explore the data, scroll through rows and columns, sort the data, filter rows, and perform other basic data manipulation operations.

### reading the csv file

```
strain2 <- read.csv("strain2_COG.csv")
```

* ```strain2``` : This is the name of the variable where the data from the CSV file will be stored. It is created and assigned the data read from the file.

* ```<-``` : This is the assignment operator in R. It assigns the data read from the CSV file to the variable strain2.

* ```read.csv("strain2_COG.csv")``` : This is the function call to read.csv(), which reads the data from the file "strain2_COG.csv" and returns it as a data frame. The file is assumed to be located in the current working directory unless a full path is provided.

The ```read.csv()``` function in R reads the data from the CSV file, automatically infers column names from the header row (first row) of the file, and creates a data frame with the read data. The resulting data frame strain2 will have rows and columns corresponding to the data from the CSV file.

### To count the frequency of the individual items present inside the data frame

```
strain2 <- table(strain2$strain2_COG)
```

* ```strain2``` : This is the name of the variable where the frequency table will be stored. It is created and assigned the frequency table generated by the table() function.

* ```<-``` : This is the assignment operator in R. It assigns the frequency table to the variable strain2.

* ```table(strain2$strain2_COG)``` : This is the function call to table(), which generates a frequency table for the column named "strain2_COG" in the strain2 data frame.

The expression ```strain2$strain2_COG``` is used to access the column ```"strain2_COG"``` from the data frame strain2. This column is assumed to contain categorical data, such as different categories or factors representing observations.

The ```table()``` function then counts the occurrences of each unique value in the specified column and creates a table that shows the frequency of each category or factor. The resulting frequency table will have rows corresponding to the unique values in the "strain2_COG" column and a corresponding count of how many times each value appears in the data.

### To merge both the dataframe files

```
dataframe_name = merge(strain1, strain2, by.x = "Var1", "Freq", by.y = "Var1", "Freq", all.x = TRUE, all.y =TRUE)
```

* ```dataframe_name``` : This is the name of the resulting data frame that will store the merged data. The new data frame will have columns from both strain1 and strain2 data frames, combined based on the specified merge criteria.

* ```merge()``` : This is the function used for merging two data frames. It takes two or more data frames as arguments and combines them based on the specified merging criteria.

* ```strain1 and strain2``` : These are the names of the data frames you want to merge.

* ```by.x = "Var1" and by.y = "Var1" ``` : These arguments specify the columns used as the merging key. In this case, both data frames have a common column named "Var1," and the merge operation will be based on this column.

* ``` "all.x = TRUE" and "all.y = TRUE" ```: These arguments indicate that the merge operation should include all rows from both strain1 and strain2. When all.x = TRUE, all rows from strain1 will be included in the merged data frame, even if they do not have a match in strain2. Similarly, when all.y = TRUE, all rows from strain2 will be included, even if they do not have a match in strain1.

The resulting data frame dataframe_name will contain columns from both strain1 and strain2, merged based on the values in the "Var1" column. Rows that have matching values in the "Var1" column in both data frames will be combined into a single row in the merged data frame, while non-matching rows will have missing values (NA) in the corresponding columns.


### Substituting 'NA' with '0'

```
dataframe_name[is.na(dataframe_name)] <- 0 
```

* ```dataframe_name``` : This is the name of the data frame that you want to modify by replacing the missing values.

* ```is.na(dataframe_name)``` : This expression returns a logical matrix of the same dimensions as dataframe_name, where each element is TRUE if the corresponding element in dataframe_name is NA, and FALSE otherwise. In other words, it creates a mask that identifies the locations of the missing values in the data frame.

* ```dataframe_name[is.na(dataframe_name)]``` : This uses the logical mask to select only the elements of dataframe_name that are NA. It creates a subset of dataframe_name containing only the missing values.

* ```<- 0``` : This assignment operation replaces all the selected missing values with the value 0.

By executing this code, any missing values in dataframe_name will be replaced with the value 0, effectively filling in the missing entries with this default value.

### Removing the serial numbers(1,2,3....)in the new merged file and display only the COG categories

```
rownames(dataframe_name) <-dataframe_name[,1]
```

* ```dataframe_name``` : This is the name of the data frame for which you want to set the row names.

* ```rownames()``` : This is a function in R used to get or set the row names of a data frame.

* ```dataframe_name[, 1]``` : This expression selects the values from the first column of dataframe_name. The syntax [ ,1] specifies that we want all rows (denoted by the empty space before the comma) and the first column (denoted by the number 1 after the comma).

* ```<-``` : This is the assignment operator in R. It assigns the values from dataframe_name[, 1] as the new row names of the data frame dataframe_name.

By executing this code, the row names of dataframe_name will be set to the values from its first column. The data frame will now have row names that uniquely identify each row based on the values in the first column.

### To remove the extra COG coloumn:(use minus symbol(-) with the required coloumn to be removed)

```
dataframe_name <- dataframe_name[,-c(1)]
```

* ```dataframe_name``` : This is the name of the data frame from which you want to remove the first column.

* ```[, -c(1)]``` : This expression is used for subsetting the data frame. The -c(1) part indicates that we want to exclude the first column. The c(1) creates a vector containing the number 1, and the minus sign - before it indicates that we want to exclude this column.

* ```<-``` : This is the assignment operator in R. It assigns the subsetted data frame (with the first column removed) back to the variable dataframe_name.

By executing this code, the data frame dataframe_name will now contain all columns except the first one. The first column has been removed from the data frame.

### To rename the coloumns in the dataframe:

```
colnames(dataframe_name) = c("strain1", "strain2", "strain3", "strain4", "strain5", "strain6") 
```

* ```dataframe_name``` : This is the name of the data frame whose column names you want to change.

* ```colnames()``` : This is a function in R used to get or set the column names of a data frame.

* ```c("strain1", "strain2", "strain3", "strain4", "strain5", "strain6")``` : This is a character vector containing the new column names you want to assign to the data frame. The order of names in this vector corresponds to the order of columns in the data frame.

* ```=``` : This is the assignment operator in R. It assigns the new column names to the columns of the data frame.

By executing this code, the column names of dataframe_name will be updated to "strain1", "strain2", "strain3", "strain4", "strain5", and "strain6". The first column will be renamed to "strain1", the second column to "strain2", and so on, based on the order of names in the character vector.

### For heatmap, you have to convert the dataframe into the matrix form

```
dataframe_name <- as.matrix(dataframe_name) 
```

* ```dataframe_name``` : This is the name of the data frame that you want to convert to a matrix.

* ```as.matrix()``` : This is a function in R used to convert an object to a matrix. In this case, it is used to convert the data frame dataframe_name to a matrix.

By executing this code, the data frame dataframe_name will be converted to a matrix format. A matrix is a two-dimensional data structure with rows and columns, similar to a data frame. However, unlike a data frame, a matrix can only contain elements of the same data type.

When you convert a data frame to a matrix using as.matrix(), the column names and row names (if any) are not preserved. The resulting matrix will only contain the numeric values from the original data frame. If the original data frame contains any non-numeric columns (e.g., character or factor columns), those columns will be coerced into character vectors, and the resulting matrix will have all its elements treated as character data.


### To draw the heatmap 

```
heatmap(dataframe_name)
```

* ```dataframe_name``` : This is the name of the matrix that you want to visualize as a heatmap.
  
When you execute heatmap(dataframe_name), R will generate a heatmap plot with the rows and columns of the matrix represented as a grid. The heatmap uses different colors to represent the values in the matrix, and the intensity of the color indicates the magnitude of the values. Typically, higher values are represented by darker colors, and lower values by lighter colors.

The ```heatmap()``` function uses the default settings to generate the heatmap. However, you can customize the appearance of the heatmap by using additional arguments to control aspects such as the color palette, row and column clustering, row and column labels, and more.

We use the gplots package to access additional color palettes (e.g., cm.colors()) and customize the heatmap by scaling the rows. You can further explore the documentation of the heatmap() function to discover additional options for creating and customizing heatmaps in R.

### To export the required dataframe to the main folder

```
write.csv(dataframe_name,"new_file_name.csv", row.names = TRUE) 
```

* ```write.csv()``` function is used to write data frames to CSV files.
  
* ```dataframe_name``` : This is the name of the data frame that you want to save to a CSV file.

* ``` "new_file_name.csv" ``` : This is the file name of the CSV file where the data frame will be saved. The file will be created in the current working directory unless a full path is provided.

* ```row.names = TRUE``` : This argument specifies whether to include the row names of the data frame in the CSV file. When row.names = TRUE, the row names will be saved as the first column in the CSV file. If row.names = FALSE, the row names will not be saved, and the CSV file will only contain the data columns.

By executing this code, R will create a new CSV file named "new_file_name.csv" and write the contents of the dataframe_name data frame to the file. The resulting CSV file will have the data frame's column names as the first row (header row) and, if row.names = TRUE, the row names as the first column.

### To view the header of the dataframe

```
head(dataframe_name)
```
The ```head()``` function in R is used to view the first few rows of a data frame or a matrix. It is a convenient way to quickly inspect the data and get an overview of its structure and contents without displaying the entire dataset.

When you execute ```head(dataframe_name)``` , R will display the first six rows of the data frame dataframe_name. If dataframe_name has fewer than six rows, it will display all available rows.


### To view the structure of the dataframe

```
str(dataframe_name)
```

The ```str()``` function in R is used to display the structure of an R object, providing a concise summary of its type and content. When applied to a data frame like dataframe_name, the str() function will display information about its columns, their data types, and the first few rows of data.


### To create elegant data visualizations using the grammar of graphics

```
install.packages("ggplot2")
library("ggplot2")
```

* Install the Package:
  
To install the ``` "ggplot2" ``` package, you can use the install.packages() function. This function is used to download and install R packages from the CRAN repository.

Running this command in your R environment will download and install the "ggplot2" package and its dependencies. Once the installation is complete, you don't need to repeat this step unless you want to update the package to a newer version.

* Load the Package:
  
After the package is installed, you can load it into your current R session using the library() function. The library() function makes the functions and features of the package available for use in your R code.

By running this command, you activate the ``` "ggplot2" ``` package, and now you can use functions and create visualizations provided by the package.

Once the ``` "ggplot2" ``` package is installed and loaded, you can start creating various types of data visualizations using the powerful and flexible capabilities of ggplot2.


### To draw the Pretty Heatmaps(pheatmap)

* First install the package and load the library 

```
install.packages("pheatmap") 
library("pheatmap")
```

* Install the Package:
  
To install the ``` "pheatmap" ``` package, you can use the install.packages() function. This function downloads and installs R packages from the CRAN repository.

Running this command in your R environment will download and install the "pheatmap" package along with any required dependencies. You only need to install the package once unless you want to update it to a newer version in the future.

* Load the Package:
  
After the package is installed, you can load it into your current R session using the library() function. The ```library()``` function makes the functions and features of the package available for use in your R code.

By running this command, you activate the "pheatmap" package, and now you can use functions and create heatmaps using the pheatmap function provided by the package.

Once the "pheatmap" package is installed and loaded, you can start creating customized and visually appealing heatmaps for your data.

* Then run using the script

```
pheatmap(dataframe_name,treeheight_row = 0, treeheight_col = 0, color =colorRampPalette(c("white","orange","red"))(50), fontsize_row = 5)
```

* ```dataframe_name``` : This is the name of the data frame that you want to visualize as a heatmap.

* ```treeheight_row``` = ```0``` : This argument controls the height of the row dendrogram (tree) in the heatmap. Setting it to 0 means the row dendrogram will be hidden.

* ```treeheight_col = ```0``` : This argument controls the height of the column dendrogram (tree) in the heatmap. Setting it to 0 means the column dendrogram will be hidden.

* ```color``` = ```colorRampPalette(c("white","orange","red"))(50)``` : This argument controls the color palette used for the heatmap. In this case, it uses the colorRampPalette() function to create a color gradient from white to orange to red, and the heatmap will have 50 color levels.

* ```fontsize_row``` = ```5``` : This argument sets the font size for the row labels in the heatmap to 5.

By executing this code, you will create a heatmap of dataframe_name with specific customizations. The heatmap will not display row and column dendrograms, and it will use a color gradient from white to orange to red with 50 color levels. The row labels will have a font size of 5.

The "pheatmap" package in R is a powerful tool for creating highly customizable and visually appealing heatmaps, and it offers various options to control the appearance of the heatmap, dendrograms, colors, and labels. 






